---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

Hello, I'm Trailrunny, the author of these pages. I wrote the Muay Thai Notebook (MTNTBK) from
the perspective of an enthusiastic learner--a nerd of the art--not an expert or teacher (Kru).
These were initially my own private notes, in which I wanted to organize the huge amount of
information I was getting from practicing, reading about, and watching Muay Thai. Later, I
started using the notes to make my training more systematic: to motivate myself, to reflect on
the more obscure aspects of the art, and learn new things. I hope they can do the same for you!

I currently train at [Fightlab](https://www.instagram.com/thefightlabusa/) in Fort Lee, NJ with
Coaches Fitz and Felson and occasionally at [Lucky's Muay
Thai](https://www.instagram.com/luckysmuaythai/) in Miami with coach Jacob. Before COVID, I was
at Coban's in Manhattan. [Coban](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coban_Lookchaomaesaitong) used
to cook tripe for us on a hotplate after practice. And in another lifetime, I did some
old-school American kickboxing with the local legend and champ, Kerry Roop of Rochester,
Michigan. Someday soon, I hope to spend time training in Thailand.

{% include image.html url="../../assets/images/roop.jpg" description="Kerry Roop Axe Kicking
the World" width="400"%}

My approach to sports writing comes from Soviet-era boxing manuals such as M.I.  Romanenko's
*The Mastery of Boxing* (1960), Y.B. Nikifirov's *A Boxer's Feel for Distance* (1971), and
Romanov's *Boxing in Long, Middle, and Close Ranges* (1979). I also love the more
philosophically-inclined English-language authors like [Jack
Slack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Slack), Joyce Carol Oates (she wrote a great book of
essays *On Boxing* in 1987 with the photographer John Ranard), John Updike, Norman Mailer, and
David Foster Wallace.

![](../../assets/images/soviet-box.jpg)

[Sylvie von Duuglas-Ittu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sylvie_von_Duuglas-Ittu) and her
husband Kevin deserve a special mention in gratitude of their work on the [Muay Thai
Library](https://www.instagram.com/themuaythailibrary/) project.

Please feel free to reach out with your comments or suggestions here. Support my work on
Patreon.
