---
layout: default
title: Clinch
nav_order: 2
parent: Muay Khao
permalink: muay-khao/clinch
has_children: true

---

{% include labels/draft.html %}
{% include toc.html %}

The clinch is meant to exhaust and tie up the opponent. It presents significant offensive and
defensive capabilities for those who practice it regularly. Those who do not, tend to panic and
tire quickly. Don't muscle in the clinch, outside of short bursts. It's rather a game of
balance, positional dominance, and explosive attacks.

Defensively, the clinch can be used to negate your opponent's favored offensive tools. It's
particularly effective in smothering tricky out-fighters, who would prefer to stay at range,
darting in and out with long straight punches, kicks, and spinning techniques. The clinch
forces the out-fighter to the inside, reducing advantages of speed and mobility. When stalked
to the ropes, the inexperienced out-fighter can drown under the pressure of Muay Khao's
relentless knees, elbows, and sweeps.

## Common Positions ðŸ”“

{% include labels/members-only.html %}

<div data-ms-content="members">

To make things more orderly, let's conceptualize the clinch as involving several distinct
games: over and under, inside and outside, long and short. Later, we'll be able to connect the
these into a single, continuous system. Though, of course, you will naturally prefer some of
these positions over the others.

</div>

## Over and Under ðŸ”“

The *over* game favors the taller fighter, involving several dominant, top positions.

</div>

## Entry and Exit ðŸ”“

{% include labels/members-only.html %}
<div data-ms-content="members">

So you like to clinch, but you get clipped on the way in. To get the fight into your preferred
zone of action, you must first pass through your opponent's offenses in the far, middle, and
close ranges. Safe entries and exits from the clinch must therefore be understood, visualized,
and practiced regularly in sparring.

Entries into the clinch can be chained from both your offensive and defensive
combos.

Consider for example the basic `one, two, three` boxing combo, with the three being your lead
hook. Instead of punching, the lead hook can be modified slightly to wrap around the opponent's
lead hand, or deeper into the position, around the neck. The combination then becomes `one,
two, hook clinch entry`. The entry is made safer by the opponent covering from the `jab, cross`.

Similarly, the clinch can be initiated on the defensive footing. For example, recall raising
your left elbow to "answer the phone" in response to your opponent's right hook. From that
position, lower your elbow and extend the arm to find yourself on the inside, in the clinch.

Whether on the offense or defense, understand that "naked" entry into the clinch is easily
avoided. It is also dangerous for you, because you are obviously moving forward. Instead, chain
the entry to flow smoothly at the end of your existing combinations. Have several such entries
ready at your disposal.

Exit from the clinch is likewise dangerous for both fighters. In my gym, fighters often assume
their exits are completely covered by some sort of a mutual understanding to break apart and
recover.

Nothing can be further from the truth. The exit is a moment of extreme peril. You must
understand this to both do it safely and to create the maximum amount of disruption for your
opponent.

Safe exit for yourself often means taking a route around, and toward the back of your opponent,
ideally with a parting shot that reinforces the exit. Alternatively, coaches often teach a
forceful frontal forearm push away from the action, in which both fighters end up taking a step
back, again with a parting shot to cover.

Whatever the case, moments of separation are safest when your opponent is unbalanced and you
are not. Whenever possible, you should be the one "leading the dance" of positional dominance,
not the other way around.

In her podcast dedicated to the art of Muay Khao, Sylvie von Duuglas-Ittu recommends yo-yoing
between the entry and exit positions, which is particularly effective when fighting under
rulesets that discourage lengthy clinch engagements. In this way, you can enter the clinch,
attack, push out, attack, and then reengage rapidly to keep your opponent from ever settling.
Violent, unexpected collisions happen on the way in and out of the clinch range. This "catch
and release" dynamic creates a moment of false relief, at a time of extreme vulnerability for
your opponent. Exploit it to your advantage by always finishing your exits with an attack.
Treat the exit as part of a combination and train it purposefully.

</div>

## Sweeps and Trips

### Competition Rules

### Judo Sweeps for Muay Thai

## Locks
## Training
## Counter-play

## Credits and Footnotes

1. <sub>Diagram by [Alain
Delmas](https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?search=%22Alain+Delmas%22&title=Special:MediaSearch&go=Go&type=image),
from Wikimedia.org, licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.</sub>

