---
layout: default
title: Clinch Theory
nav_order: 1
grand_parent: Muay Khao
parent: Clinch
permalink: muay-khao/clinch-theory

---

{% include labels/draft.html %}
{% include toc.html %}

## Clinch Theory

Dominant clinchers will push, drag, hang onto, and otherwise unbalance their opponent.
Recognizing these dominant positions allows the Muay Khao to rest in relative safety, while the
opponent expands significant energy trying to "muscle out." At the extreme, a fading fighter
uses the clinch to play for locked positions, stalling the game until a referee's break.

Remember then, that the clinch is not a goal in itself. Offensively, you clinch for advantage
by scoring hooks and uppercuts, knee and elbow strikes, sweeps and dumps. Defensively, you
clinch to neutralize your opponent's long range game, to rest, or to stall safely for time.

### The Importance of Balance

Depth in your clinch

### Develop a Clinch System

In older Muay Thai manuals, the clinch was often called the "chest-to-chest" position. But
depending on your height and your strength, you may end up preferring to play for top
dominance (over), or for bottom dominance (under). Your goal in this section should be to
develop a flexible game plan: to recognize common positions, transitions, and counters.

With time, you may develop a "system" that is uniquely yours, playing on your strengths and
preferences. For example, as a taller fighter (6'2" or 188cm, 160lb or 73kg), I often find
myself in the top-heavy, "over" position, where it's easier to hide my head over my opponent's
shoulder. From there, I would also to prefer to knee aggressively, since my height makes it
easier to clear the waist. The over position also allows me to elbow over my opponents guard.
The difference in height naturally directs my attacks upward, and the opponent's, down.

This preferred game plan goes out of the window when meeting fighters of similar or taller
stature. In the "under" game, I do better in hiding or "posting" my head on the opponents
chest, digging up, and into the chin with the top of my head. And since kneeing above the belt
is difficult with a taller opponent, I will prefer to knee into the thigh, or play for sweeps
or body locks.  From the bottom, I also have better access to sneaky uppercuts and up-elbows,
blocked by the taller fighter's blind-spots. At a height disadvantage, I therefore concentrate
my attention on the bottom half of the body, playing for the advantages that come naturally
from the bottom.

Dominance in the clinch thus involves minimizing your opponent's options for offense, while
maximizing your own offensive capabilities. In the prefect world, your clinch would completely
smother your opponent into inaction, while allowing you to score freely. Due to the extreme
closeup nature of the "chest to chest" position, the offensive capabilities of the clinch favor
close range weapons, such as knees, elbows, hooks, and uppercuts. Though quite economical,
these strikes still need space to find their target.

### Space

Safety in the clinch comes from controlling the opponents neck and arm, as well as from
"hiding" the head tightly over an opponent's shoulder (for a taller fighter) or tucking into
the chest, under the chin (for the shorter fighter). This lack of space prevents significant
strikes. From the locked position, explosive movement is used to create space filled by knees
and elbows.

{% include image.html url="../../../assets/images/alaine-delmas/knee-clinch.jpg"
description="Create space. Break posture. Knee.<sup>1</sup>" width="400" %}

We are then faced with the fundamental paradox of the clinch: to smother the opponent, you need
to take their space away. Any space between you and them needs to be "eaten up" in the process.
This consumption of space defines the Muay Khao fighter, who constantly moves forward to
pressure their target. But, in the taking away of an opponent's space, the Muay Khao needs to
also open space into which their own strikes can expand. Yet, any such opening also gives
offensive room for the opponent. This is the beautiful puzzle at the center of Muay Khao: to
find free movement in the action of smothering.

### A Dynamic Position

Whatever your preferred position, avoid treating the clinch as a static position. Similar to
other forms of specialized grappling, it's rather a dynamic system, which has to be adapted
actively to your opponent. Once you train to recognize common positions automatically, you will
fluidly begin to flow between dominant positions, in search for a decisive advantage.

