---
layout: default
title: Seven Principles of MT
nav_order: 2
published: True
parent: Training Philosophy
permalink: training-philosophy/principles

---
Beta Draft
{: .label .label-yellow}

{% include toc.html %}

## The Seven Remarkable Principles of MT
{: .no_toc }

###  Joy.

If Thailand is the "land of smiles," according to the tourist brochure, Muay Thai is the art of
beating someone up in a way that's lighthearted and fun. Preferably for both people involved.
Thai gyms are distinctive for their playful attitude, even as Thai fighters are known for their
brutal skill and tenacity in the ring.

This light touch is apparent as soon as you walk into any Muay Thai gym, distinct from Karate
Dojos, MMA, or Western Boxing training camps. First, you may note a more casual attitude toward
the formal aspects of training decorum. There is not a lot of bowing happening or saluting a
photograph of some ancient sensei. After practice in his basement gym in Manhattan, Coban
Lookchaomaesaitong, a world champion, would often cook tripe with noodles for his students. We
called him simply Coban and drank beer with him outside the gym. He was more of our gym uncle,
than a sensei. Our respect came not from formal greetings, but in shared sweat (and tripe).

The casual, fun attitude permeates the serious parts of the sport, like sparring. Sparring, in
any discipline, especially in the West, can often escalate into a life-and-death affair. People
get emotionally upset. Egos flair. Advanced, more athletic students dominate, to the point of
injury. This feels like war, attracting violent people who are good at that sort of a thing
(while alienating most others).

Muay Thai has plenty of warriors of its own. But the atmosphere is much more playful. And
therefore more inclusive. The roots of Muay Thai still exist in the festival culture, where
fights happen for entertainment (and gambling), not for blood sport. Rural children train,
fight, and grow up together, with hundreds of fights to their record (by contrast with Western
fighters, who may fight dozens of time in their career).

Though MT fighters retire early, the way of joyous training sustains its practitioners for a
lifetime. Fewer injuries means more fitness and more fun. Lighthearted sparring means more
sparring practice for those who would otherwise be too intimidated to join. Though gender
dynamics are culturally specific and complex, the Muay Thai way makes it easy to train across
sexes, ages, and weight classes.

### Composure.

The playful attitude of an MT fighter emphasises emotional and physical composure: laughter
over anger. It requires staying calm under stress. Ultimately, it projects an image of strength
through calm, cool, collected action.

{% include coming-soon.html %}

### Community.

The feeling of a community is something that flows naturally from the joy of training in a
well-functioning Muay Thai gym. Many gyms in Thailand thrive in a rural, family-oriented
environment. They are businesses but also places which people trust with their kids. They often
maintain boarding arrangements, where fighters rest and share meals. And though fighting is a
solo sport, the MT way of training feels more like a team sport because of this heritage:
People do exercises together, hold pads for each other, and go on regular morning runs
together, as a team.

The community aspect of MT training reflects on gym culture. Competitive fighters may be
sparring with amateurs, who, in turn, show up to support their teammates in competition.
Ultimately, a good gym can be more than a rental space for private exercise. It will be a place
welcoming of adults and children, a place to catch up on the news, to discuss a recent fight,
to share a meal, and to experience camaraderie with strangers.

Those few who played a part in an athletic team---dancers, bandmates, or members of a theatre
troupe---will know the feeling well, united by the common bond of a shared physical art form.
In fighting and in adult life such opportunities are exceedingly rare, which makes the Muay
Thai gym a pretty special place. Its communal spirit should be apparent as soon as you open the
door.

### Style.

{% include coming-soon.html %}

### Economy of movement.

{% include coming-soon.html %}

### Repetition.

{% include coming-soon.html %}

### Fitness.

{% include coming-soon.html %}

