---
layout: default
title: Muay Khao (Knees and Clinch Style)
nav_order: 2

---

# Muay Khao (Knees and Clinch Style)

## Introduction

The art of Muay Khao emphasizes close-range techniques including clinch, knee and elbow
strikes, dumps, and sweeps. Muay Khao fighters tend to stalk, smother, and exhaust their
opponents with relentless forward pressure.

The Muay Khao style will favor an aggressive, taller fighter with good stamina and balance.
Shorter Nak Muays may be at a slight disadvantage when kneeing from the clinch. A taller Muay
Khao will be susceptible to a strong bottom game, losing exchanges at the lower center of
gravity (dumps, sweeps, or body locks). Whatever your body type, remember that every position
in the clinch has its answers. Clinch fighters should therefore become familiar with common
escapes and counter-movements, in a way that allows them to flow between forms.

Knees get knockouts. Dominance in the clinch looks good. And nothing beats a skillfull sweep.
These techniques score highly, favored by audiences everywhere. And although many fights end up
in the clinch for most of each round, clinch is rarely given the same priority as striking
during practice in the West.  By contrast, Thai gyms include a regular clinch regiment in their
routine, where you can expect to see lengthy, low-key clinch grinding sessions as well as
high-intensity sparring rounds with hard falls.

When training the clinch, take proper safety precautions to minimize trauma, especially for
beginners. Side swipe the knees instead of direct, sharp hits. Assist landings when possible.
Indicate elbows at a quarter turn. More advanced practitioners will benefit from wearing elbow
and knee pads, though the Thais will often do without.

One common exercise involves "swimming" for dominant position. In another, a fighter's stamina
is tested by feeding them a string of fresh opponents, who exit the encounter at each
successful sweep (sometimes called, man-in-the-middle).

Since clinch work is essentially a type of stand-up grappling, a gym with a strong Judo or BJJ
program can borrow ideas, coaches, and ways of training from those sports to improve their Muay
Thai curriculum.


## Clinch
### Entry
### Exit
### Rest
### Top Control
### Bottom Control
### Sweeps
### Dumps
### Locks
## Counter-play (avoiding the clinch)

### Training



## Knees

### Long vs. Short Knee
### Spear Knee
### Side Knee
### Jump Knee



