---
layout: default
title: Training Philosophy
nav_order: 2
published: false

---

Muay Thai can be super fun. And healthy. And challenging. And yes, it's a sport that can be
practiced as any other sport, Western Kickboxing or Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu. Yet, it is also an
art, which carries with it a sense of a distinctive style and a way of thinking---a philosophy
of the body.

Of course, this way of life has its home in Southeast Asia: Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos. Today
it's also practiced in gyms all over the world: popular on its own merits and as one of the
pillars within the greater mixed martial arts movement. As a recipient of this tradition
outside of its homeland, I cannot claim some special, authoritative point of view on the art as
a whole. These are a student's observations, which I share with you in hopes of a common
starting point (and not an end) to a life-long discussion.

But what is a philosophy of the art, anyway? Or philosophy of sport? And why should you care?
All sports involve a training regiment: some things that you do during practice, for fun or in
preparation for competition. A modern marathon runner, for example, will alternate easy runs
with tempo workouts. The advanced regiment will include stretching exercises, diets, recovery
periods, cross-training, and so on. Your gym and your coaches will introduce you to many of
these specific elements. However, none of these disciplines alone amount to an art. Your local
gym may be great in some aspect of the sport, and not so great in others. That doesn't matter.
Nothing is perfect. Yet, even as a beginner, you can watch a Muay Thai bout and think to
yourself, "This is beautiful form." And after a good practice, you think "This was the Muay
Thai way." Or, "This wasn't." There wasn't necessarily anything wrong with the exercise: it was
athletic, impressive, and good for you even. It just wasn't it. It wasn't the way. It didn't
look or feel right. And that is philosophy. Whatever else you are doing with your body, you are
cultivating an idea: of good and bad, right and wrong, ugly and beautiful.

Nobody can tell you what that idea is exactly, in words, because it has to do with the movement
of your body. A philosophy of the body is something that you cultivate through exercise, diet,
recovery periods, cross-training, etc. But, to become a philosophy you also need to reflect on
that activity intellectually. That means to visualize the movements in your mind. To think
about not just the how of each movement, but the why. To imagine them within the emotional
context of exhaustion, or joy. To think of the tissues that connect the foot that pivots with
the hook that follows. To imagine that mental space of your opponent, and to anticipate their
movement. Those are the things that elevate mere physical movement into a philosophy.

All great athletes embody a philosophy of the sport, implicitly or explicitly. But you don't
have to be an elite athlete to become a philosopher. In fact, reflecting on your training in
this way, taking notes or visualizing the perfect movement in your head, should be a part of
your practice from day one. The philosophy makes the sport meaningful, beyond the gym. And it
can sustain you through tough times, at low points when you are feeling down, unmotivated, or
injured.

Okay then, so I have convinced you to think of yourself as a philosopher at any sport. Don't
just punch things, think about them too. Fine. What about Muay Thai in particular? What makes
it unique among other martial arts? What is the good and the beautiful in Muay Thai? What are
its core tenets and principles?

## The Seven Remarkable Principles of MT

1. Joy.

If Thailand is the "land of smiles," according to the tourist brochure, Muay Thai is the art of
beating someone up in a way that's lighthearted and fun. Preferably for both people involved.
The Thai gym is distinctive for its playful attitude, even as Thai fighters are known for their
brutal skill and tenacity in the ring.

This light touch is apparent as soon as you walk into any Muay Thai gym, distinct from Karate
Dojos, MMA, or Western Boxing training camps. First, you may note a more casual attitude toward
the formal aspects of training decorum. There is not a lot of bowing happening or saluting a
photograph of some ancient sensei. After practice in his basement gym in Manhattan, Coban
Lookchaomaesaitong, a world champion, would often cook tripe with noodles for his students. We
called him simply Coban and drank beer with him outside the gym. He was more of our gym uncle,
than a sensei. Our respect came not from formal greetings, but in shared sweat (and tripe).

The casual, fun attitude permeates the serious parts of the sport, like sparring. Sparring, in
any discipline, especially in the West, can often escalate into a life-and-death affair. People
get emotionally upset. Egos flair. Advanced, more athletic students dominate, to the point of
injury. This feels like war, attracting violent people who are good at that sort of a thing
(while alienating most others).

Muay Thai has plenty of warriors of its own. But the atmosphere is much more playful. And
therefore more inclusive. The roots of Muay Thai still exist in the festival culture, where
fights happen for entertainment (and gambling), not for blood sport. Rural children train,
fight, and grow up together, with hundreds of fights to their record (by contrast with Western
fighters, who may fight dozens of time in their career).

Though MT fighters retire early, the way of joyous training sustains its practitioners for a
lifetime. Fewer injuries means more fitness and more fun. Lighthearted sparring means more
sparring practice for those who would otherwise be too intimidated to join. Though gender
dynamics are culturally specific and complex, the Muay Thai way makes it easy to train across
sexes, ages, and weight classes. The playful attitude emphasises emotional and physical
control: laughter over anger. It requires staying calm under stress. Ultimately, it projects an
image of strength through calm, cool, collected action.

2. Community.

The feeling of a community is something that flows naturally from the joy of training in a
well-functioning Muay Thai gym. Many gyms in Thailand thrive in a rural, family-oriented
environment. They are businesses but also places which people trust with their kids. They often
maintain boarding arrangements, where fighters rest and share meals. And though fighting is a
solo sport, the MT way of training feels more like a team sport because of this heritage:
People do exercises together, hold pads for each other, and go on regular morning runs
together, as a team.

The community aspect of MT training reflects on gym culture. Competitive fighters may be
sparring with amateurs, who, in turn, show up to support their teammates in competition.
Ultimately, a good gym can be more than a rental space for private exercise. It will be a place
welcoming of adults and children, a place to catch up on the news, to discuss a recent fight,
to share a meal, and to experience camaraderie with strangers.

Those few who played a part in an athletic team---dancers, bandmates, or members of a theatre
troupe---will know the feeling well, united by the common bond of a shared physical art form.
In fighting and in adult life such opportunities are exceedingly rare, which makes the Muay
Thai gym a pretty special place. Its communal spirit should be apparent as soon as you open the
door.

2. Form.
3. Economy of movement.
4. Repetition.
5. Composure.
7. Fitness.

## Training Regiments

Jump Rope
Road Work (Running)
Strength and Conditioning
