---
layout: default
title: Clinch
nav_order: 2
parent: Muay Khao
permalink: muay-khao/clinch

---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## Clinch Theory

The clinch is meant to exhaust and tie up the opponent. It presents significant offensive and
defensive capabilities for those who practice it regularly. Those who do not, tend to panic and
tire quickly. Don't muscle in the clinch, outside of short bursts. It's rather a game of
balance, positional dominance, and explosive attacks.

Defensively, the clinch can be used to negate your opponent's favored offensive tools. It's
particularly effective in smothering tricky out-fighters, who would prefer to stay at range,
darting in and out with long straight punches, kicks, and spinning techniques. The clinch
forces the out-fighter to the inside, reducing advantages of speed and mobility. When stalked
to the ropes, the inexperienced out-fighter can drown under the pressure of Muay Khao's
relentless knees, elbows, and sweeps.

Dominant clinchers will push, drag, hang onto, and otherwise unbalance their opponent.
Recognizing these dominant positions allows the Muay Khao to rest in relative safety, while the
opponent expands significant energy trying to "muscle out." At the extreme, a fading fighter
uses the clinch to play for locked positions, stalling the game until a referee's break.

Safety in the clinch comes also from controlling the opponents neck and arm, as well as from
"hiding" the head tightly over an opponent's shoulder (for a taller fighter) or tucking into
the chest, under the chin (for the shorter fighter). This lack of space prevents significant
strikes. From the locked position, explosive movement is used to create space filled by knees
and elbows.

{% include image.html url="../../../assets/images/alaine-delmas/knee-clinch.jpg"
description="Create space. Break posture. Knee.<sup>1</sup>" width="400" %}

Sudden changes in positional balance flows into a limited number of allowable sweeps, similar
in their dynamics to Judo sweeps such as the
[Deashi-harai](https://judo.ijf.org/techniques/De-ashi-harai) (Forward Foot Sweep),
[Okuri-ashi-harai](https://judo.ijf.org/techniques/Okuri-ashi-harai) (Following Foot Sweep),
[Hiza-guruma](https://judo.ijf.org/techniques/Hiza-guruma) (Knee Wheel), or
[Harai-](https://judo.ijf.org/techniques/Harai-tsurikomi-ashi) and [Sasae-tsurikomi-ashi](
https://judo.ijf.org/techniques/Sasae-tsurikomi-ashi) (Foot Sweeps). For the rules on what
sweeps are allowed, see the Rules.

In older Muay Thai manuals, the clinch was often called the "chest-to-chest" position. But
depending on your height and your strength, you may end up preferring to play for top
dominance (over), or for bottom dominance (under). Your goal in this section should be to
develop a flexible game plan: to recognize common positions, transitions, and counters.

With time, you may develop a "system" that is uniquely yours, playing on your strengths and
preferences. For example, as a taller fighter (6'2" or 188cm, 160lb or 73kg), I often find
myself in the top-heavy, "over" position, where it's easier to hide my head over my opponent's
shoulder. From there, I would also to prefer to knee aggressively, since my height makes it
easier to clear the waist. The over position also allows me to elbow over my opponents guard.
The difference in height naturally directs my attacks upward, and the opponent's, down.

This preferred game plan goes out of the window when meeting fighters of similar or taller
stature. In the "under" game, I do better in hiding or "posting" my head on the opponents
chest, digging up, and into the chin with the top of my head. And since kneeing above the belt
is difficult with a taller opponent, I will prefer to knee into the thigh, or play for sweeps
or body locks.  From the bottom, I also have better access to sneaky uppercuts and up-elbows,
blocked by the taller fighter's blind-spots. At a height disadvantage, I therefore concentrate
my attention on the bottom half of the body, playing for the advantages that come naturally
from the bottom.

Dominance in the clinch thus involves minimizing your opponent's options for offense, while
maximizing your own offensive capabilities. In the prefect world, your clinch would completely
smother your opponent into inaction, while allowing you to score freely. Due to the extreme
closeup nature of the "chest to chest" position, the offensive capabilities of the clinch favor
close range weapons, such as knees, elbows, hooks, and uppercuts. Though quite economical,
these strikes still need space to find their target.

We are then faced with the fundamental paradox of the clinch: to smother the opponent, you need
to take their space away. Any space between you and them needs to be "eaten up" in the process.
This consumption of space defines the Muay Khao fighter, who constantly moves forward to
pressure their target. But, in the taking away of an opponent's space, the Muay Khao needs to
also open space into which their own strikes can expand. Yet, any such opening also gives
offensive room for the opponent. This is the beautiful puzzle at the center of Muay Khao: to
find free movement in the action of smothering.

Whatever your preferred position, avoid treating the clinch as a static position. Similar to
other forms of specialized grappling, it's rather a dynamic system, which has to be adapted
actively to your opponent. Once you train to recognize common positions automatically, you will
fluidly begin to flow between dominant positions, in search for a decisive advantage.

## Common Positions

To make things more orderly, let's conceptualize the clinch as involving several distinct
games: over and under, inside and outside, long and short. Later, we'll be able to connect the
these into a single, continuous system. Though, of course, you will naturally prefer some of
these positions over the others.

<div data-ms-content="boxer-pages">

## Over and Under

The *over* game favors the taller fighter, involving several dominant, top positions.

The first of these 

### Over
### Under

## Entry and Exit

So you like to clinch, but you get clipped on the way in. To get the fight into your preferred
zone of action, you must first pass through your opponent's offenses in the far, middle, and
close ranges. Safe entries and exits from the clinch must therefore be understood, visualized,
and practiced regularly in sparring.

Entries into the clinch can be chained from both your offensive and defensive
combos.

Consider for example the basic `one, two, three` boxing combo, with the three being your lead
hook. Instead of punching, the lead hook can be modified slightly to wrap around the opponent's
lead hand, or deeper into the position, around the neck. The combination then becomes `one,
two, hook clinch entry`. The entry is made safer by the opponent covering from the `jab, cross`.

Similarly, the clinch can be initiated on the defensive footing. For example, recall raising
your left elbow to "answer the phone" in response to your opponent's right hook. From that
position, lower your elbow and extend the arm to find yourself on the inside, in the clinch.

Whether on the offense or defense, understand that "naked" entry into the clinch is easily
avoided. It is also dangerous for you, because you are obviously moving forward. Instead, chain
the entry to flow smoothly at the end of your existing combinations. Have several such entries
ready at your disposal.

Exit from the clinch is likewise dangerous for both fighters. In my gym, fighters often assume
their exits are completely covered by some sort of a mutual understanding to break apart and
recover.

Nothing can be further from the truth. The exit is a moment of extreme peril. You must
understand this to both do it safely and to create the maximum amount of disruption for your
opponent.

Safe exit for yourself often means taking a route around, and toward the back of your opponent,
ideally with a parting shot that reinforces the exit. Alternatively, coaches often teach a
forceful frontal forearm push away from the action, in which both fighters end up taking a step
back, again with a parting shot to cover.

Whatever the case, moments of separation are safest when your opponent is unbalanced and you
are not. Whenever possible, you should be the one "leading the dance" of positional dominance,
not the other way around.

In her podcast dedicated to the art of Muay Khao, Sylvie von Duuglas-Ittu recommends yo-yoing
between the entry and exit positions, which is particularly effective when fighting under
rulesets that discourage lengthy clinch engagements. In this way, you can enter the clinch,
attack, push out, attack, and then reengage rapidly to keep your opponent from ever settling.
Violent, unexpected collisions happen on the way in and out of the clinch range. This "catch
and release" dynamic creates a moment of false relief, at a time of extreme vulnerability for
your opponent. Exploit it to your advantage by always finishing your exits with an attack.
Treat the exit as part of a combination and train it purposefully.

## Sweeps and Trips

### What Is Allowed?

### Judo Sweeps for Muay Thai

## Locks
## Training
## Counter-play

</div>

## Credits and Footnotes

1. <sub>Diagram by [Alain
Delmas](https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?search=%22Alain+Delmas%22&title=Special:MediaSearch&go=Go&type=image),
from Wikimedia.org, licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.</sub>

